JAMES-3211 Generalize EventBus ADR (#3437)
linagora/james-project: src/adr/0040-generalize-event-bus.md

#40. Generalize EventBus

Date: 2020-06-11

## Status

Proposed

## Context

When searching for users by quota ratio if we set the value of the parameters to 0, the search feature is supposed to return newly created users

> who have not received any email yet at that point. However, this is not the case due to the quotas are currently being initialized only after

Reviewer: ```suggestion
who have not received any email yet at that point. However, this is not the case because the quotas are currently being initialized only after
```

> an user receive the first email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a user receive the first email.
```

> In order to solve this problem, we need to initialize user quotas upon creation time. Event driven system allows indirection so that the users api 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to solve this problem, we need to initialize user quotas upon user creation time. Event driven system allows indirection so that the users api 
```

> In order to solve this problem, we need to initialize user quotas upon creation time. Event driven system allows indirection so that the users api 

Reviewer: > Event driven system allows indirection so that the users api don't need a dependency on the quota components

Is it still part of the "Context" section? It's a general information about Event-Driven system contextualized to the case of user management and quota-search feature: it presents a solution to a problem that is not stated yet.

> The EventBus components currently defined in in mailbox-api would be suitable for this purpose.

Same here: we talk about a solution in the context section and yet we don't know what the problem is.

Let me try to write it another way (at this point we stated the problem is about initializing the searchable-per-user-quota):

The root of this problem is: there's currently no event at user creation and as the quota-search feature is a plugin of James, it can't be hardwire into the domain logic of user management to initialize the quota for a just created user.

don't need a dependency on the quota components. The EventBus components currently defined in in mailbox-api would be suitable for this purpose.

> ## Decision

Reviewer: I suggest:

For quota-search to initialize a given user and remove it at the right time while keeping that feature as a plugin, we decided to adopt the Event Driven pattern we already use in mailbox and create new events related to user management (UserCreated, UserRemoved and so on).

To achieve that, we will extract the EventBus api out of the mailbox-api and make both mailbox-api and data-api depend on that new module eventbus-api.

Extract the EventBus out of mailbox-api in order to make it a utility component so it can be used by all other components.

## Consequences

 - Mailbox-api would leverage the EventBus to keep exposing the MailboxListener api without changes on top of the generified EventBus.  

>  - We can no longer use the sealed hierarchy for events as they depend on different specific components. 

Reviewer: Let's make the EventBus generic to keep the sealed hierarchy: the hierarchy root could be the parameter of the EventBus

Reviewer 2: Do you mean "having several event buses"? How would we enforce (rabbitmq) resiurce isolation?

What would it bring?

Reviewer: > What would it bring?

Keeping the sealed hierarchy which allow to write "total function" listeners (it allows to ensure we don't receive some event types and we don't forget some others)

For example, it allows me to register a `MailboxListener` as today instead of a `Listener` that will just receive `Event` as a type and will finally match only mailbox related events.

> Do you mean "having several event buses"?

It's one of the solutions. We can think about others if this one has problems.

> How would we enforce (rabbitmq) resiurce isolation?

We can define an exchange for each sealed hierarchy.

 - We could rely on the EventBus reliability for building any feature in James. 

>  - Breaking changes would likely happen on the MailboxEvent serialization. Upgrade will need to happen with an empty EventBus & DeadLetter.

Reviewer: I don't see any reason for that.

#40. Generalize EventBus

Date: 2020-06-11

## Status

Proposed

## Context

> 

Reviewer 2: I had a very interesting discussion with Eugen Stan yesterday. 

Globally, we need to connect our architecture decisions with the Email business domain James is all about (and I tend to agree).

Here quota ratio search is rather abstract.

Maybe we can further explain what it is:

```
User Email storage usage is limited both in size and count via quotas (IMAP RFC-2087). In 
order to ease administating large user bases, the quota search extension allows administrator
to retrieve all users exceeding a given occupation ratio.

When searching for users by quota ratio if we set ...
```

I believe it helps connecting the decision with the domain and explains what it is all about.

> When searching for users by quota ratio if we set the value of the parameters to 0, the search feature is supposed to return newly created users

Reviewer 3: maybe a link to the relevant api would help to understand this sentence

> who have not receive any email yet at that point. However, this is not the case due to the quotas are currently being initialize only after

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
who have not received any email yet at that point. However, this is not the case due to the quotas currently being initialized only after
```

> a user receive the first email.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a user receives the first email.
```

> In order to solve this problem, we need to have some kind of event-driven system so when an new user is created successfully, 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In order to solve this problem, we need to have some kind of event-driven system so when a new user is created successfully, 
```

> their quota should also be created immediately after. 

Reviewer 2: I would mention that "event driven system allows indirection so that the users api don't need a dependency on the quota components".

> The EventBus components currently implemented in mailbox-api would be suitable for this purpose.

Reviewer 2: The EventBus components currently defined in

> and since the quota-search feature is a plugin of James, it can not be hardwired into the domain logic of user management to initialize the quota for a just created user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and since the quota-search feature is a plugin of James, it cannot be hardwired into the domain logic of user management to initialize the quota for a just created user.
```

## Decision

> Move the EventBus outside of mailbox-api so it can be implemented anywhere in James by adding the corresponding dependency. 

Reviewer 2: so it can be used by all components

Reviewer 2: I think we miss a term for components, that are not core components, but offer services to other core components. I propose utility component wording.

Then we just say "extract the EventBus out of mailbox-api in order to make it a utility component".

What do you think?

One potential location is the server module.

## Consequences

 - Mailbox-api would leverage the EventBus to keep exposing the MailboxListener api without changes on top of the generified EventBus.  

>  - We can no longer use the sealed hierarchy for events as they depend on different specific components. 

Reviewer 2: What is the impact of this? What work would we need to cary out?

> To achieve that, we will extract the EventBus out of mailbox-api in order to make it a utility component (eventbus-api), then we make both mailbox-api and data-api depend on that new module. 

Reviewer 5: To achieve that, we will extract the EventBus out of mailbox-api in order to make it a utility component (eventbus-api), then we make both mailbox-api and data-api depend on that new module. 
```suggestion
To achieve that, we will extract the EventBus out of mailbox-api in order to make it a utility component (eventbus-api), then we will make both mailbox-api and data-api depend on that new module. 
```

> We could rely on the EventBus reliability for building any feature in James. Breaking changes would likely happen on the MailboxEvent serialization. Upgrade will need to happen with an empty EventBus & DeadLetter.

Reviewer 2: With @mbaechler proposal you adopted it is no longer true: ` Breaking changes would likely happen on the MailboxEvent serialization. Upgrade will need to happen with an empty EventBus & DeadLetter.`

Let's remove it.

#40. Generalize EventBus

Date: 2020-06-11

## Status

Proposed

## Context

User email storage usage is limited both in size and count via quotas (IMAP RFC-2087). In order to ease administrating large user bases, the quota search extension allows administrator
to retrieve all users whose email usages are exceeding a given occupation ratio.

> When searching for users by quota ratio if we set the value of the parameters to 0, for example: /quotas/users?minOccupationRatio=0.0&maxOccupationRatio=0.0, the search feature is supposed to return newly created users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When searching for users by quota ratio if we set the value of the parameters to 0, for example: `/quotas/users?minOccupationRatio=0&maxOccupationRatio=0`, the search feature is supposed to return newly created users
```

## Context

When searching for users by quota ratio if we set the value of the parameters to 0, the search feature is supposed to return newly created users
who have not received any email yet at that point. However, this is not the case due to the quotas are currently being initialized only after
an user receive the first email.

In order to solve this problem, we need to initialize user quotas on creation time. Event driven system allows indirection so that the users api 
don't need a dependency on the quota components. The EventBus components currently defined in in mailbox-api would be suitable for this purpose.

## Decision

> Extract the EventBus out of mailbox-api in order to make it a utility component so it can be used by all other components.

Reviewer 2: I propose to add in the decision something that solves the initial concern.

Could you detail what you would do to solve that bug once you can use the EventBus for it?

## Consequences

Mailbox-api would leverage the EventBus to keep exposing the MailboxListener api without changes on top of the generified EventBus. 

> We can no longer use the sealed hierarchy for events as they depend on different specific components. We need to define an common Event in eventbus-api, then create new implementation related to the domain where we want to make use of the EventBus. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We can no longer use the sealed hierarchy for events as they depend on different specific components. We need to define a common Event in eventbus-api, then create new implementation related to the domain where we want to make use of the EventBus. 
```

Reviewer 2: Given @mbaechler proposal: each event-bus usage will define its own sealed event hierarchy.

## Consequences

Mailbox-api would leverage the EventBus to keep exposing the MailboxListener api without changes on top of the generified EventBus. 

> We need to define a common Event in eventbus-api, then each event-bus usage will define its own sealed event hierarchy. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to define a common Event interface in eventbus-api, then each event-bus usage will define its own sealed event hierarchy implementing Event. 
```
